So in this application, we can navigate around a bit and we had a look at basic navigation and as a nice
side effect, we I think built a pretty nice app thus far.
Now obviously, you can tweak that app and continue working on that to really fine tune it to your requirements
but I want to dive in to more navigation related features and one such feature is that I want to have
some tabs at the bottom here which allow me to go to my favorited recipes
and right now, we got no way of marking a meal as a recipe, we'll add that of course.
So to go to my favorites then or to go to all these categories we got here.
So for that, we want tabs and I want tabs at the bottom of this category screen and also at the bottom
of this to be added favoritesScreen and actually the way you add tabs
in Flutter works such that you add a totally new screen and I'll name that tabs_screen.dart, the
name is up to you of course
and that is a screen which will only manage the tabs and then load different screens depending on which
tab was selected.
So the TabsScreen itself is a widget, though it will be a stateful widget here and I'll name it tabs
screen
and with this snippet the Flutter extension gives me in Visual Studio Code, the widget
and its state that belongs to it is created automatically.
Now as always, we need to import material.dart in here and now we can start working with that. So
the TabsScreen here is in the end, should be TabsScreen by the way,
so let's fix that in all these places.
So the TabsScreen here has the goal of rendering the tabs and then the appropriate content for each
tab depending on which tab was selected.
So the TabsScreen will fill out the overall page in the end and hence here in the build method, we should
return a scaffold widget because you learned if you want to manage the entire screen with a widget, you
typically use a scaffold there
since this sets the background color, lets you add an appBar and also as you will now see, lets you
add tabs. Now actually, there are two ways of adding tabs to Flutter apps
and I will show you both. The first way is that you add the tabs not at the bottom of the screen but at the
bottom of your appBar
and that's something you see in some of the Android apps that are out there. For that pattern,
you actually don't return a scaffold here but a default tab controller widget which then has a scaffold
widget as its child.
Now besides that scaffold child widget, the default tab controller also has a length argument where you
define how many tabs you want to have
and I want to have two, one for all categories and one for the favorite items.
Now in scaffold, you then add your appBar and that is the normal appBar and on that appBar, you can
of course set your title, like meals, whatever you want and you can then add a bottom argument to add
that tabs element or that tabs bar at the bottom of this widget and then inside of that bottom, you add
the TabBar widget which Flutter provides.
The TabBar widget Flutter gives you here now takes a tabs argument which is a list of widgets. In
that list of widgets, you now add tab widgets,
again these are all widgets provided by Flutter and I will have two tabs here because that's the length
I specified here and that is the amount of tabs I need.
So now here, each tab typically takes an icon which is displayed and here we could go with
icons.category for the category page and you can also set a text here and text actually takes a
string, not a widget and that could be categories and here,
icon takes an icon widget,
so we should wrap icons category with that. So that's the first tab, on the second tab,
we also add an icon which takes an icon widget which then wraps icons. and then star is a good icon
for indicating that this will manage some favorites here and then we also add a text and here we
could have favorites as a text,
so that's the second tab.
Now the default tab controller and the TabBar here are automatically connected by Flutter behind the
scenes to work together.
So the default tab controller will automatically detect which tab you selected and then show the right
content for that tab,
you just need you tell it which content to show for which tab and therefore to your scaffold,
so after the appBar, you add your body
but now instead of adding a normal body, like a column or a text, you add a TabBarView and that's the
last piece that's all connected together behind the scenes by Flutter. The TabBarView is taken into
account by the default tab controller in conjunction with your TabBar and Flutter then keeps track
which tab you selected and if it's the first tab, then the first element which you add here to
TabBarView will be shown
and if it's the second tab, the second element will be shown because to TabBarView, you add children
and now you should add as many child widgets here as you have tabs because then the child widget for
each tab will be shown as the main body of this screen and therefore here, we could now add categories,
the categories screen and later also add the favoritesScreen which we yet have to add.
Now first of all, let me fix the import for categories screen here,
I want to use a relative import and remove screens were already in that folder and with that, add a new
file which I'll name favorites_screen.dart
and for now, that will be a plain stateless widget favoritesScreen
where you
as always should import material.dart of course to unlock stateless widget and so on and then just as
before, simply as a dummy here, I will show some centered text here,
the favorites and later of course, we'll really populate that with favorites.
Now please note that I'm not using scaffold here and I'm doing it on purpose here and I'll show you
why in a second.
So back in the TabsScreen, we now use the favoritesScreen as the second widget here in our list of widgets.
Now both widgets should be instantiated, so you need concrete objects here and now the default tab controller
up there will automatically switch between them as you switch between these two tabs
and of course the order of the tabs here should belong or should match the order of your screens here,
first
tab triggers or activates this screen, second tab activates this screen. With that, let's load the tabs
screen as our default screen. So in the main.dart file, instead of loading categories screen as the default,
I now want to load tabs screen as the default
and of course for that, you need to import the tabs screen and you know me,
I will of course adjust that path here to be a relative path.
So now the TabsScreen is loaded as a default and if we now do a full restart here with that green arrow
at the top,
this is what we get. Now we have tabs here and what you also now see is that we have a duplicate appBar
for categories but not for favorites.
Now remember that for favorites, I mentioned that I did deliberately not add a scaffold here.
The reason for that is that now the favoritesScreen still kind of is like a screen, it still occupies
the majority of our page but it doesn't manage the entire page.
Of course, we still have our tabs in the appBar of the TabsScreen up there.
So the content we load into a tab should now not bring its own scaffold because it will not control the
entire page,
instead it will be a part of the TabsScreen, the favoritesScreen is now only controlling that bottom
part here.
So for the categories screen, you should now also get rid of the scaffold here and just return what you
want to show in the content,
so in my case here, the GridView and of course then also delete redundant parentheses at the bottom and
with that change,
now this looks better.
Now you can of course configure these tabs,
so here in the TabBar, you can control a bunch of things, a lot of that is never required but you can
change the color your tabs or the
icons there will have when they are getting activated, which color your text in the tabs has and so
on,
you can register a listener to any user tabs in case you also want to do something in that case. So you
can configure a lot there
and of course simply play around with the TabBar to see what exactly you can control there. On the default
tab controller,
you can also for example set the initial index and by default, that is 0 which means that the first tab
is selected
but if you wanted to select the second one, the favorites one, then you would set this to index 1 and this
index works like the index in a list,
it starts at 0 not at 1.
So now with that if I select 1 here as a default value and I do a full restart, you see we start with the
favorite selected here.
So that is all something you can do,
again 0 is the default, it doesn't need to be configured and that is one way of adding tabs in case you
want that
ook where you have your tabs here sit right below your appBar.